[Music]
hi
and welcome to another episode of
ingredient challenge with me rosie
burkett for bbc good food
in this episode we're going to be
cooking with one of my favorite store
covered ingredients
anchovies and we're going to be making a
really gorgeous creamy
cauliflower and anchovy gratin but if
you've only got broccoli that also works
really well
[Music]
let's go through the ingredients i'm
using so i've got some anchovies and
olive oil we're going to need about
five or six fillets a lemon some dried
chili flakes
half a red chili i'd use a whole one
normally but that's all i've got
you could use green as well a couple of
cloves of garlic
two tablespoons of plain flour 300 ml of
milk
i've got a couple of tablespoons of
creme fraiche but you could use sour
cream or double cream
and then i've got some crispy dry bread
crumbs here with some
pumpkin seeds so if you've got some
breadcrumbs great otherwise some lovely
pumpkin seeds or sunflower seeds just to
add a bit of crunch
and we've got our cauliflower a glass of
white wine
some rosemary and some dried chili
flakes
first to prepare your cauliflower if
you've got one like this that's got
loads of leaves on it then
you just want to cut off the base here
and then peel off the leaves now i'm
going to keep these and put them in the
gratin after i've given them a wash
so i'm just cutting these leaves off
here and then i'm going to cut out
the core of the cauliflower
just go around like this
and then just pull that out
and then you want to break your
cauliflower down into florets
this one's breaking apart quite easily
you want them to be kind of bite-sized
florets and then i'm still going to use
this lovely core of the cauliflower
because that's got loads of flavor in it
so i'm just going to chop that up
it's lovely and nutty and then we're
going to just briefly
blanch this cauliflower so into a pan of
boiling water
salted boiling water we're just going to
boil it for about three minutes
so i've just drained my cauliflower here
and i'm just going to blanch
the rest of these leaves really briefly
in the water as well
so just for literally about a minute
zest your lemon
so here's our blanched cauliflower and
cauliflower leaves and i've got an
oiled roasting tin here so i'm just
going to arrange
the leaves in the dish
and what i want to do is have some nice
bits of leaf sticking up around the
sides because that's going to create
some lovely crispy bits
we all know those are the best bits
don't we
put those in there and then in with the
lovely cauliflower
just tuck it all in and then i'm going
to squeeze over
some lemon juice over here
we're just going to dice our chili up
nice and small so
cut it if cut it into strips
like that and then just dice it up
i've taken the seeds out of this one
because it's insanely hot
as i learned last night but um obviously
chillies do vary so it's up to you
how spicy you want it
we're going to crush our garlic
just cutting off the base and then
crushing it out of the skin
and just finely chop
chop up our rosemary as well
so you want to get your anchovies out
i'm going to use about
five of these nice anchovies in olive
oil
it's about that many and then just
roughly chop those
but they're actually going to break down
in the oil so you don't need to chop
them very finely
so i've got my pan over a medium-high
heat and i've got my anchovies rosemary
garlic and chili and my lemon zest
i'm just going to heat up a couple of
tablespoons of olive oil
and then slide in these ingredients
and you want to just fry these off for a
couple of minutes
until the anchovies have melted down
into the olive oil and the olive oil is
infused with all these lovely flavors
also put your lemon zest in there as
well
and then this is all going to infuse in
the olive oil and already it's smelling
absolutely incredible you can see that
the
anchovies are starting to just break
down in the oil
we've also got our oven heating to 180
fan and you can see
here that those anchovies have really
broken down
into the oil and all their flavor has
been infused and the garlic smelling
really really delicious then we want to
go in with our flour
and we're going to make a roux now by
cooking the flour into the infused oil
with the other aromatic ingredients so
you just want to cook that
into the oil and you'll get a lovely
paste
okay so i've got my roux here and i'm
just going to tip in my wine
immediately bubble up
and thicken and then you just want to
stir it really rapidly
and to get rid of any lumps
oh my gosh the smells are off the charts
good here
just cook that into a lovely thick
base and then you want to start slowly
adding in your milk
so this is quite hard to do with one
hand but you want to gradually
add in your milk and just stir it in
to the roux
and that's going to create your lovely
creamy
don't worry if it splits you can just
bring it together and keep stirring it
to get rid of the lumps so you want to
cook it into the base like that
and then just add a bit more and keep on
doing that until all the milk's been
incorporated
you can see i've got a lovely thick
sauce here
and i'm just going to add my last bit of
milk
so that's going in there and you just
keep on stirring and incorporating it
and it will just come together into a
lovely silky
delicious sauce so we've got a lovely
thick creamy sauce here and i'm just
going to add in
my creme fresh or if you're using double
cream
add that in at this point and just cook
that into the sauce as well
and there's our creamy sauce with the
cream incorporated the creme fraiche
i'm just going to add a little pinch of
chili flakes at this point because i
just tasted it and it's not quite
spicy enough for my liking i like it to
be quite spicy
and a pinch of sauce as well you don't
need too much salt for this because
there's obviously a lot of salt in the
anchovies
but it just needed a little pinch of
salt just to
boost those flavors right so here's our
finished
sauce and we want to just pour this now
over the cauliflower
so make sure it's coating
all of the different florets
and leaves of cauliflower i'm using a
spoon just to make sure that i can get
some really nice even distribution
a little bit of a spill though and there
you go you can tip it all over once
you've
coated everything just scrape out the
pan
and then you want to grab your crispy
bread crumbs and pumpkin seeds
and sprinkle those over the top and
that's going to give it a lovely crust
i've got some fennel seeds in there as
well but that's that's really optional
that's going to give it a lovely crunch
when you cut into it
there we go and now this is going in the
oven
at 180 fan for about 20 minutes till
it's bubbling and golden and delicious
so the gratin's been in the oven for
about 25
minutes and it's ready it's
lovely and golden as you can see
and the crust on top's gone really nice
and crunchy
um it smells amazing this is really
versatile this dish you can have it with
pan fried fish it's good with chicken
it's good on its own with some bread
there are so many things you can do with
this
but yeah it's even just great on its own
as a lovely lunch
so there you go a gorgeous anchovy and
cauliflower gratin
i hope you enjoyed this video and i'll
be back soon with more
[Music]
you